[Music]
2014 India Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Promise An International Day of Yoga at the
United Nations General
[Music]
Assembly Today is another day I'd like to draw your
attention to another subject We talk now about
climate change Now about holistic health One we talk now about
nature One we talk now about getting back on this basis I'd like to say something about this
subject Yoga It's a traditional and able gift
Yoga is the body and mind Thought and
action Achievement and self and the body Together of
human beings And
our Yoga is
true It's a
[Music]
strange It's a [
Music] by the way
You're well done The firmament I am a peter Rapy Pray Pray
and
good This Papy
[Music] But
being in this direction with an
International Day of
Yoga on 11 December
20144 The United Nations made a resolution
making 21 June the International Day of Yoga
1177 Nations Cosponsor The resolution is a record
in UN
history
[Music]
Minister of State Shri
Katraj Nagendra Chan of the Committee on AYUSH
We will begin with an opening statement by excerpt from the
Minister speaking in Hindi but
simple voice interpretation has been
provided so those of you who need headsets
please put them on
This is our second meeting in the last 10 days On the
first
day we discussed the achievements of the entire Ministry of External Affairs and
foreign policy
but today our press conference will be
limited to International Yoga Day only
With me is the Minister of State with
Independent Charge for the Department of AYUSH, Bhai Shri Pad
Nayak My right hand is the Chancellor of S Vyas University
and the Chairman of our Committee
Dr Nagendra ji and Secretary of AYUSH
Shri Saniyal
ji
You will remember that in the last press conference
I had said a sentence that in just 12 months
India has reached such a pinnacle of the world
where when India speaks the world listens  The
declaration of 21st June as International Yoga Day is a direct proof of that.
You just saw in the presentation that was presented before you
that on 27th September, while
addressing the United Nations General Assembly, the
Prime Minister expressed a desire, did
not put forward a proposal, but expressed a desire
that 21st June should be declared as International Yoga Day.
He said that Yoga is not just exercise
but Yoga is also a medium to connect humans with nature
and
a medium to connect the living being with the Brahman
and that is why he appealed to the world to move forward
with Yoga and declare 21st June as
International Yoga Day.
You also saw the second date, 11th December. On 11th December,
with the co-sponsorship of 177 countries, that is, 177 countries became co-sponsors
with it and the resolution was
passed unanimously and unopposed. If we
count the difference in these days, then it becomes a
total of 75 days. The
PM spoke on 27th September
and the resolution was passed on 11th December.
This resolution was passed in just 75 days with the co-sponsorship of 177 countries. It was
said in the presentation that this is a record.
How is this record? The previous UN
record was that
68 countries had cosponsored the proposal of Nelson Mandela, breaking that record,
177 countries cosponsored it
and as I said, this
proposal was passed unanimously, so 75 days and 177
countries, this in itself becomes a record. Now,
since this happened on India's initiative, it is very
important that India celebrates it with great grandeur
and on a very wide scale.
To achieve this goal,
two different departments were given the responsibility. The
Ministry of External Affairs was given the responsibility to
organize International Yoga Day abroad
and the Ministry of AYUSH was
given the main responsibility to
organize International Yoga Day in the country and along with this, the Ministry of
Defence, Home Ministry, Human Resource Ministry, Ministry of
Youth Affairs and the
Ministry of Culture and Tourism were kept as their partners.
I am very happy to tell you today that
these are 177 countries because many times this
topic comes up that Yoga is a work associated with a particular religion.
I would like to tell you that in 17 countries, 47  There are
countries which are members of OIC,
47 Muslim countries are included in the 177 member countries of Organization of Islamic Countries,
no one opposed the co-sponsorship, but those who became our co-
sponsors, who became our co-spinners,
when we talked about making this program,
one idea also came to our mind that
we should choose the same time in the whole world
and at the same time, like it happens in Earth that
if it is 8 o'clock, then whenever it is 8 o'clock in any country,
this program should be held at that time,
but the suggestion came from the Muslim countries that
Ramadan will start,
you should allow us to do it after Roza Iftar,
so we
kept in the program that there is no
restriction on the time, whichever country is
comfortable, let it decide, so
they especially told us that we want to do it with great grandeur, so
we completely
accepted this suggestion, instead of earlier
telling all the countries to do it at the same time,
we decided that
all the countries should do it as per their convenience, I am
happy to tell you the second thing that
in the world there are a total of 193
We are conducting this program in 192 countries including India,
except Yemen.
We left Yemen because
our embassy there has been closed and shifted to Djibouti. The
situation in Yemen is similar to that
in other countries as well, but we are conducting it everywhere. The
only reason for not conducting it in Yemen is
that we do not have an embassy there. So,
this program will be conducted by the Ministry of External Affairs in 192 countries,
and we have missions only in 121 countries.
Other countries that do
not have missions are also included in this. Despite this, to
call it truly world-class, we are conducting it
even in those places where we do not have missions.
I would especially like to thank
those yoga gurus whose institutions are supporting us
for conducting the program on such a large scale, because we could
send very few yoga teachers from our side, 30 or
31,
but their centers of yoga gurus are located in
many places, some in 121 places, some in 151 places,
so they told us that they will send their teachers
and train people there,
but if you say that it is in all places  If it happens,
it will happen everywhere. So,
through this press conference, I especially
want to express my gratitude to those yoga gurus
who have
supported us in making this program successful.
After the foreign programs, the domestic program was
given to the Ministry of AYUSH, as I said, and
some other ministries are working with them.
We have planned some big programs in that. The
biggest program that AYUSH is organizing will be
on Rajpath, where 35,000 people will do
yoga together. This limit was imposed
due to space. We wanted to gather even 100,000 people here,
but because the space was
not enough, all
three types of asanas are being done - standing, sitting,
and lying down. The
time required for the asanas to be done while lying down would require as many
mats as would have to be laid out.
Even after occupying the entire space, that space was
not enough for more people, hence the
number has been kept around 35,000.
Apart from that, the Ministry of AYUSH is working through its own arrangements in 70 districts.
They have appointed
NGOs and they are going to every district. There are a
total of 676 districts in the country, but 650
districts are covered by AYUSH.  He is
organizing programs there through himself. As
I said, other ministries are also
supporting them. State governments are
working at their level. District
collectors are also working at their level.
But I am most happy
that this program is not happening only at the government level.
This program is happening on a very large scale, so
our scale seems very small in front of that. The
yoga gurus and yoga institutes have
astonishing figures. Baba Ramdev is organizing
1100 programs abroad.
In England alone, he is organizing 400 programs in the UK.
He has
set a target of one lakh programs to reach every village here. He
wants to reach 10 crore people. On the
International Yoga Day,
information came from Sri Sri Ravi Shankar that he
wants to reach 5 crore people. So, the
number in itself is what is called a mind-
boggling number. Jaggi Vasudev
's programs are being organized both outside and in Tamil Nadu and in the
country. Programs are being organized on such a large scale
that
we could not have imagined. The enthusiasm that is
visible among the people is immense in itself.
One thing I
would like to say very specifically is that there is no compulsion to participate in these programs.
People should come
and participate voluntarily. This is our main
objective. We are not forcing anyone to come by force. The
message has been given that people should come on their own,
voluntarily, and only those who come voluntarily will be able to
participate.
We are not forcing anyone. Thirdly, the Yoga
Institute and the government are definitely organizing these
programs, but it is amazing to see the enthusiasm with which
people are making their own plans in the parks. So,
these programs will be organized on such a large scale. Along with this,
our AYUSH has decided to issue a postage stamp
and two
coins, one coin of Rs. 100 and one coin of Rs. 100. The Rs. 100 coin will be
commemorative and the Rs. 100
coin will come into circulation.
Similarly, the
Postal Department is issuing a postage stamp
and the RBI is making coins. Along with this,
we have also got celebrity endorsements
done in India. Amitabh Bachchan, Virat
Kohli, Suresh Kumar, Sushil Kumar have already done
endorsements.  Even abroad, our
mission has got
endorsements from the celebrities of those countries.
After this, you will get
a presentation of AYUSH as well as of M.
You will also get to see those celebrities in that.
But what I mean to say is that the
objective behind the initiative taken by India was to take the world plagued by violence on the
path of peace. Vasudhaiva
Kutumbakam, which is our slogan that the entire
world is like a family, should be
connected through yoga. Yoga is a
huge soft power of India. Through that soft power, the
world should come together and the
increasing tendency of violence should
end through yoga. I feel that the beginning on 21st June will be the
beginning of fulfilling our wish and after that, we will really be
able to take the world on the path of peace. I have only this to
say from my side. If my colleague, the
Minister of AYUSH, wants to add something, he
can add to it.
Once again, I welcome everyone.
Honorable Sushma ji has
placed before you the topic about the country and abroad.
This program is for the benefit of our country.  It is
working to increase pride, we are getting support from everywhere, be it
yoga gurus or NGOs or
yoga ashrams, we are getting support from everyone and
this is its main program, as
mentioned in Delhi, its arrangements are also being done completely
and a good and beautiful program will be held
in Delhi, in which the honorable
Prime Minister himself will be present
and will address all those who come to do yoga, will
address the entire country, at
least 35000, more than 35000 people will be present
here,
all the other preparations for the work have been completed and I
think that
as we have applied for a record in Guinness Book of World Records,
this will also be a record
through this program, you all have been
supporting for many days,
its promotion is being done through you people,
even after this program,
we will continue to get your support,
with this hope I thank you all once again, I
thank the two ministers for their
statement, now we have to present the
action plan by AYUSH and action plan by
ministry external and will begin with action
plan by
AYUSH
Rebel  External Affairs Minister Smt.
Sush Swaraj Respected Minister of State
Independent Charges Ministry of AYUSH
Shri Shripad Naik Ji Very Respected
Dr.
Nagendra Secretary AYUSH Shri Sanjiv
Ji Respected Secretary from My
Affairs OYS Yoga
It is my dear friend from Media and Press My
Great Nayak and my dear friend my dear friend my dear friend my brief presentation
of action plan on International Day of Yoga as the
Minister mentions the mandate of
celebrating International Day of Yoga has been
assigned to the Ministry of AYUSH by the Notary
Ministry in Government of
India so as to notice this was declared on 21st
June International Day of Yoga on 11th December
2014 so this is the brief of action plan they can be
mass action programme
Rajpat two day International Conference Gyan Bhawan
built in June Cannu l ining l Cst
and ls The Central Castle for research
Yoga Naturopathy we have
one NGO in  50 districts of the country have already started
training of general
public and also new Yuvak Kendra
members and respectable districts
from 21st May and this one month training will
continue till 21st June and on that day they will also
participate in the early
morning program from 7 to 7:35 am which will also be
followed by seminars and some small
functions and we have also requested the
state government to organize similar
events and we are getting good support
from many of the states and we have planned a very
focused communication strategy in
consultation with the Ministry of INB. Also
the ministry through ICCR has
supported private yoga trainers to
support Indian missions
abroad coming to this mass yoga
demonstration. The
minister will basically follow a common yoga
protocol of 35 minutes in detail
consultation with the important yoga  School of
country all yoga guru teacher stein consulted
by
our yoga tut under ministry of ayurveda
lapsam protocol this was
finally prepared
by committee of yoga experts chad by
doctor nagendra chancellor of
university this will basically have
35 minute yoga protocol which will be performed by everyone
in the country as well as she this
dvd a booklet by minister ar tram tm prax
mission minister ar program rajpath b live
telecast a west the nec a
doordarshan
people participant from ncc delhi school
yoga
institution
mostly
yo panjali yoga peeth sri sri ravi shankar
art of
living shasha foundation gayatri parivar our own
yoga international naturopathy organization our
course are inviting all
officer from various ministry department
commissions all our uniform
forces and
weaves applied formally we gis
and recorded for category called
largest yoga day meditation
class single  New
and y got l o
accuracy education destination of
participation ac c e undertake n d
y consultant so they will be helping us
for validation of all the participants
as i mentioned states have also been
requested to organize similar
events this is the graphic presentation
graphic view of
the new vi will be installing almost 34
28 34 or
34 DVD all along the stretch of
Rajpat from Rafi Mar crossing up to 500 meters
total distance
meters and total
area carpeted and
37000 mats
provided international conference on yoga
for holistic health n vigyan bhawan a in
action to se sen technical sen fala an ba
expert committee theme include dishon bases of
yoga yoga in disease prevention and health
promotion tic portal of yoga yoga for global
peace yoga an application living dishon of yoga as
session five and six  There will be a
panel discussion with
holistic international speakers getting
good reps
ladies from all over the country. They come from
4 participants from
country and culture. Inauguration show of Yoga
Dance
by Param Ba University students as well as
Sangeet Natak Academy. The program
will be live webcast and our course fashion will be
live
telecast stage. We have adapted for our
program and our DVD booklet will be distributed
by the Ministry,
Department, State Government and Union Government. Our
Yoga Institution will provide
DVD both in English, Hindi and distribute. Whoever is
interested in it, given them so much then some of us are
participating in Rajpat but many of them will be doing the same thing
at spective Prem
Spectative
Itan she this DVD will be for use in our mission all over our
nation. Inauguration of Yoga is provide
technical assistance support in terms of
provide coaches, trainers to NCC  The
Department of Personnel Training who are
organizing this training courses for all
the Central Government employees in various
Kalyan Kendras and also we have mentioned that
650 NGOs 650
districts are covered by NGOs. There are very few
Government organizations also and we are
providing them financial
assistance to the people. Monthly
programs.
Media publicity, rate
plan, local media, print media, air
media activity by Ministry of
Tourism,
Expert Committee, so real time service on
Yoga
[Music]
India from made by a
bass
low
logo
march dak
fin by
ay jun kiya film and we will put our
booklet, DVD on our
National Health Portal or link on Internet of
Yoga discussion form, my
mao's event.
Best user ID will be provided by an
to district so all upload what every
activity undertaking in respect
district and no  Celebrity
endorsement by mentioning Amitabh Bachchan ji, Rahul
Gandhi ji, Sushil Kumar ji have already given their
clips which have been started today tomorrow and there will be
jingles to be
run on DD and AI or
other organisations. Ministry for the air event,
the Ministry of Defence has given
permission for Yoga protocol in the country in the last
5 days.
Part of our state,
Ministry of Home Affairs and other forces are
performing their best firms and they are also
contributing contingent of 5000
from various like
IPB, CISF, BSF, CRPF and they are
contributing 5000 personnel for our state.
Ministry of Human Resource
Development is observing this International
Day of Yoga and all the education institutions have
requested all the schools, colleges,
universities to observe this very important
occasion. The Union Minister of State for Home
Affairs has mentioned that it is purely on voluntary
basis and there will be  5000 school children
from Delhi that is also being
coordinated by Ministry of HRD,
from CBSE, from Kendriya Vidyalayas, from
the Government of Delhi
Schools, Ministry of Youth Affairs
is also helping us a lot, particularly
in mobilizing foreign
participants and apart from that
members of Naru Yuvak Kendra, Sangathan, Mahila
Mandal, they will be participating in
NGOs, and apart from that, the
Ministry of Culture, Sethi, Naan, Yoga, Sangeet Natak
Academy,
General Culture Centre, celebrating the
memory of Patanjali, a work and an imp centre
for tourism, they are also coming out with
brochures, booklets,
magazines, projecting India as a yoga
destination for the entire world, it was done
by Dr.
Nagendra
Committee, thank you apart from our responsibilities, I am also the
Chief Coordinator for the
International Day of Yoga, so in that capacity
now I will be presenting to you the  Our
Action Plan for International Day of Yoga by Mission
Abbreviated as National Minister mentioned in India
Resolution de-clarified The International Day of
Yoga on June 21 was passed It was sponsored
by a record 177 countries and all 193 member
countries supported It shows the break up
of the various regions of the world which supported
the Indian
Mission We have been working in coordination with
and post abroad covering all 193 countries
As a result of our efforts we have been able to succeed
in organizing International Day
of Yoga events in 192 countries The only
country left as the Minister mentioned is Yemen Because
of the situation there we have also
deputed a large number of yoga
instructors to our Mission to assist them in
carrying out the International Day of Yoga
activities and following the External
Affairs Ministers meeting with the Major
Yoga  Organizations having international
footprint They are assisting our missions in a
big way So that is why as the Minister mentioned
we are deputing only 30 and 31 yoga
instructors The balance is being met
from the yoga organizations
In terms of publicity More than 7000
copies of 10 coffee table books and more than
19000 copies of 57 reference books
exclusively on yoga have been sent to our
missions and posts abroad 1000 copies
of the Common Yoga Protocol booklet have been
dispatched to the missions along with the
instructional DVD which is being dubbed
in eight languages
[Music]
As Jali Nad Ra Sai Chan E In Lai Vi
Shar
[Music]
Apart from six other languages ​​We are also
having the film done in Japanese and in
German and prepared for the documentary Harmony
with Nature by Raja Chaudhary  Yoga Along to the
Source by Raja Chaudhary Yoga and an Vision
of Life by Binoy K Bahl and History of
Yoga by Deepika Kothari and Ramji Om They have been made
available to all
Mission Three fold photographic images on
Yoga have also been provided to our Mission
for use royalty free They have been
sourced from the Muraji Dasai National
Institute of Yoga by Mr. Raja
Chaudhary and Mr. Binoy K
Bahl A dedicated International Day of Yoga page
on the MA website is going to be launched
and the launch will happen immediately after this
presentation by the two
ministers A large number of preparatory
events have been held in various countries
as curtain raisers for the International
Day of Yoga The main event on the 21st of June was
Yoga in the European Parliament and
Yoga at UNESCO in collaboration with Sri Sri
Ravi Shankar They have been meetings with
yoga clubs and community  Organizations
yoga classes and yoga concerts they have been
press conferences announcing events
we watch celebrations in the run up to the
festival in trid and tobo you see the
picture there from australia and daily
a  Updates and Tips on Social Media as You
Can See The Line Poster has been advertised by
a mission in
Italy on the 31st of June. There will be yoga
classes and demos based on the Common Yoga
Protocol. Articles will appear in
prominent media outlets. There will be
release of steps in three countries, at least
Brazil, Hungary, and Mauritius. There will be
yoga workshops and fairs. Photographic
exhibitions and film shows. Essay competitions and
distribution of DVDs and books. Just to give you
a flavor of what our mission has been doing, we are just
going to show you a
sampling of the posters prepared by some
of our missions. So this is a way from Serbia. The way
to
Indonesia. It has been from San Francisco. The way will be led
by Jai Uttal, Grammy
nominated artist to Ho Chi Minh City. From
South
Africa. The way to Iceland.
From the Gulf countries. Way to your See poster. Now
posters from Dubai. The way to
China. Central Asia.  This is the poster from
Yemen and Europe or the posters from
Lisbon and
Monaco so all in all there will be 191
countries covered from India out of the 19 only Yemen
is missing and there will be a total of 251
cities covered in six continents so
from North America there will be 15
cities from South America from South America there will be
20 from Europe there will be 63
from Asia there will be 75 from Austria
and Oceania there will be 23 and 55 from
Africa just to give you the scale at which we are
organizing International Day of Yoga
events this gives you a listing of some of the
large scale events our mission has
prepared and is going to have more than 12000
people but also in reach of 10000 and
even Singapore will have 5000 Oslo will have
3000 Beijing will have  3000 Berlin will have
2000 Gota will have
1500 Not only are the events being held
in the capital cities but in several countries there
will be total events across the country
so these are some of the countries there will be
multiple city venues USA China Australia Canada Germany
UK Sri Lanka Thailand Vietnam Switzerland UAE Afghanistan Bangladesh
Indonesia Rush Nepal
South Africa Japan Italy Myanmar
and Saudi
Arabia Minister mention the celebrity
participation from Algiers We have the
Algerian Minister of Sports and Youth
Affairs Ho Chi Minh City We have a famous
singer Ng Fei Hung In Bangkok the Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
himself will be leading the IDWA events
In Copenhagen we will have the Minister for
Children and Gender Equality Manu Sarin In
Maldives Foreign Minister Duniya Mymoon
will be there as well as famous actor Ali
Seezan In San Francisco Ja Uttal the Grammy
nominee Sa Palo Maza  The famous brilliant Jan
Munch in Sydney it will be Brotherly and Vankar and
expect Bollywood stars Kapil Sharma and
Maks you have Paras Tika the captain of the
national cricket team of Nepal endorsing
yoga and in mutliple we have live up Moria
Delia famous actress and
singer finally Prince Raimal Ali will be the
patron of the yoga celebration in
Jordan the best flagship of them he will be
at the United Nations because it will begin
the national external affairs minister himself will be
presiding over the ceremony in the
presence of Sri Sri Ravi Shankar he will lead the
yoga practice and we have also got
confirmation from UN Secretary General
Ban Ki Moon and President of the 69th UN
General Assembly summarily the event will be
broadcast live at times square thank
you so this as you can see is going to be
our
cover page
which will also have details on the International
Day of Yoga celebration  Abroad these dots are
actually representing
International Day of Yoga events so you click on
any one of the dots let's click on this
little dot or tiny dot Cook Isle there
you are what the event is on June 21 at what
time it is to be in to the location in Cook Isle you have
the details of the event which are going to happen
let's click on a couple of other ok let's see
ok let's see
Australia where you are in Melbourne what's
going to happen in Perth what's going to happen where is it
going to happen who is the
person to contact in
Sydney it's from here in
Russo
Moscow ldi
walk St Petersburg
so this way you can just click on interact map
you can just click on any city and you will
get instant details of where they are going to be held what we are doing whether the
person to contact is you have to put it in so with
and come to the end or press
Conference now will be happy to take
questions from the minister mention please note
this press conference is exclusively for the
International Day of Yoga so please curtail questions only
to yoga related events
please no sr ar area ok first
quen please afa a na
naam dev para from India TV this is the message
you people are giving on behalf of the government but
Robert Dur says that the way the
message is being given, the population of the country is
not accepting it because the
message of the youth is being given in a threatening manner
what are you calling intimidation
I have already said that we are
not even imposing restrictions on participation, we are
not putting any compulsion in it if we are making the
participation voluntary and willing then
where did intimidation come from
Sushma ji Madhurendra there are two statements from News Nation I
would like to know your opinion in this regard one is of your own MP
Adityanath which means that whoever does
not want to do yoga is in a way a zealot
Take samadhi and another statement has come from Baba Ramdev
that the act of namaz is
actually also an act of yoga.
What do you have to say on both? As far as Yogi Adityanath
's sister is concerned, I completely disagree with her.
This statement is unfortunate.
As far as Baba Ramdev is concerned, he is
trying to say on his behalf that
yoga is not related to any particular religion. The
kind of actions that happen in yoga, the
same kind of actions happen while offering namaz.
Okay Asif
sahib ji,
my question to you is that this yoga is being
celebrated all over the world and in the
language you have used,
Urdu is also a language. And the second thing is that has
our government or your department
contacted the madrasas of India to participate in yoga?
As far as the
languages ​​outside are concerned, Arabic is similar to Urdu, that is why we did it
in Arabic.
You must have seen here that among the six
languages ​​of the UN, Arabic is also there, so
we did it in Arabic. And as far as
madrasas are concerned, we have told everyone and no one has been left out.  Madrasas should
not be left out of it,
we have told everyone but it was said that you can
participate as per your wish Sushma ji Yogesh
Bhardwaj from Janjan Jagran Bhopal, this side, this side,
this side, yes, please tell me, ma'am, my
question is that on this proposal which was placed in the UN, is
Pakistan's name included from India's side
for support
and secondly, what was the controversy in the Madhya Pradesh government
regarding Surya Namaskar, so
what is the plan of the Madhya Pradesh government for Surya Namaskar and Yoga on 21st June,
yes, as far as Pakistan is concerned,
I said that there was no opposition from anyone, there were
1777 sponsors but there was no opposition from anyone,
hence it was passed unanimously,
yes, as far as Madhya Pradesh is concerned, the
entire plan that Madhya Pradesh has made has been
made under the state government and different
yoga institutes have also made it, which is a common
protocol, which was mentioned in both the
presentations, let me tell
you about it that
a five member committee was formed under the chairmanship of Dr. Nagendra, that five member
committee talked to almost all the major yoga institutes
and all the major yoga gurus and prepared
a common yoga protocol  But that
common yoga protocol was made
for missions sent abroad and for government programs.
Other yoga institutes or other
organizations can do anything and can do Surya
Namaskar before or after.
But in the common yoga protocol
that was made after everyone's consultation,
Surya Namaskar was
not included because they wanted only very simple asanas in
it and wanted completely safe
asanas which anyone suffering from
spondylitis or backache could do. Many asanas
of Surya Namaskar are prohibited for them and
Surya Namaskar itself is a mixture of 12 asanas, so
they had included only 15 asanas in it. So with
everyone's consent, only Surya
Namaskar was kept separate in that protocol
but there is no restriction on doing Surya Namaskar. If all the
yoga institutes
want to do Surya Namaskar in the programs they will organize, they will
do it. Sushma ji, as you said,
even 44 Muslim countries supported it
in 47, but in our own country many sectarian
forces said that Yoga is un-Islamic and
Surya Namaskar is against Islam.
With this mentality, do you think that Yoga
Day can be celebrated?  There is an attempt to reduce politics.
I told in my initial statement
that perhaps he is
saying such things due to lack of information. If he had known
that 47 Muslim countries and those countries
which are members of OEC have given
sponsorship to it and not only supported it but have also
become its co-sponsors, then perhaps he would never have
said this. This is said due to lack of information.
I am from Anzar Ullah Munsif TV.
My question is that you said that
due to Ramadan, in many Islamic countries,
what is its program in India after the evening Roza Iftar. Since there is a large
population of Muslims here who will
keep fast from 19th. Whoever
wants to do Roza after Iftar can do it. There is
no restriction on anyone to do it at 8 in the morning.
If people of Muslim community in India
can do Roza after Iftar, then it is a blatant
lie. Of course they can do it.
This 8 o'clock is only for government programs. The time
from 7:00 to 8:00 is only
for government programs. When do other institutions
want to do it?  There is no restriction on when people want to do yoga in the park, so
after Roza Iftar, if people from the Muslim community
want to do it, they can absolutely do it.
Sushma ji, I am Shrikant Bhatia
from Samvad Sindhi Newspaper. Madam,
this kind of program that is being organized is probably the
first such program in India, as far as I know, which the
whole world is
celebrating together, on the same day and at the same time.
Congratulations to the Government of India for that. Or in the future,
Madam, do you think
that yoga should be a subject and children should
also have regular yoga classes
for their health and for other things? Do you
think that after this Yoga Day,
you should start some such course etc.
which the HIV Ministry has made a part of the curriculum.
Yes, 21st June is the beginning
and on this day, when people will enjoy doing it, they will
also want to adopt it, but we will
not impose any compulsion on any curriculum. The
curriculum should definitely start so that children
learn it, they get training from the first day, they get
both these things. Um, they should be careful about it, it is
good that there should be a feeling of inner peace within them.
Feelings should also come, the biggest thing that yoga does is to
relieve stress and today most of the children are
suffering from something, then
stress itself has become a big problem
and yoga is a stress buster, but
in those courses also you people will have the option
that if you want to do it then you can do it, if you don't want to do it then you can't,
we should not impose it on anyone.
Sushma ji, I am Sachin Budhauliya
from Uni Varta,
my question is that you are organizing such a big event, will the
ministers of other departments of the Modi government also
participate in it because this has
not been seen anywhere, no, all the
ministers will participate in it and
most of the ministers will be in their respective constituencies,
some other ministers have
also been asked to stay at different places, but most of the ministers and
MPs will participate in their respective constituencies.
Tush ji Vijay Trivedi from News Nation,
as you mentioned that the 47 countries which are
members of OIC are the co-spinners, but there is a
controversy on this in India, so should the
reason for this be considered that the Indian
government has failed to make the people of India, the
minority people, understand this
or  Then the reason for this is that due to the
image of Bharatiya Janata Party,
whatever happens, it seems that it is an anti-
minority action.
This must be your feeling. I don't think
that anyone understands that anything done by BJP is
anti-minority. As far as
explaining is concerned, I myself said that
lack of information is making people say this.
If they come to know that in 47 Muslim
majority countries and the presentation that
you just saw in which those countries were shown where this is happening
in many cities, because it is
happening in 192 countries but it is happening in 250 cities,
how many big Muslim countries are included in it.
There is UAE, there is Saudi Arabia, there is
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Indonesia,
all these are Muslim countries where the
program is not happening at one place, but at many places.
My question is to Shripad Nayak sahab,
as Sushma Swaraj ji said that due to
lack of information such things are coming to the fore
and this is not the intention of the government. Shripad
Nayak sahab, a statement has come quoting you that there are
nine such yoga methods which are done during Namaz, are
those nine methods
referred to?  This statement is correct, yes, I still stand by
this statement because when
I requested during the time of Namaz,
we request the society that Baba, this
yoga is universal everywhere, it does not belong to any religion,
any caste, any party and
everyone is using it
in their prayers everywhere and from whatever
information I got, I got that these
eight methods are there in the prayers that are offered at the time of Namaz,
you can check it anytime Akhilesh
Suman ji ji
ji Sushma ji today I did not learn it from Prax buffer yal
st ji Baba Ramdev, not from anyone else,
I have been doing it for 30 years
ji Akhilesh Suman I am speaking from Rajya Sabha TV, this is the
era of patents and
yoga is being done at the international and global level,
what should we expect,
what benefit will India get from this, look at this entire
process, as far as the sages and saints of India are
concerned, whatever they
thought and did on their own, they put it in the public domain,
for the welfare of humanity, we
never imposed intellectual property on such things
nor did we ever file a case for it
So all our sages and saints have
already put those things in the public domain
which are for the welfare of humanity, so from our
side,
India will never want to put the IPR tag on Yoga for the welfare of humanity
Geeta Pandey from
BBC Ask Haunt
Amed But
see, as far as foreign countries are concerned,
every mission of ours has its own publicity budget
and this Chak India Power Campaign, we are
taking our soft power forward, so we will do
it from our own budget As far as the national
level is concerned, I think no
figure has been decided yet
Sushma ji Sushma ji Sanjay Sharma from India News
Madam Rahul Gandhi has said that to
divert the attention from the problems of the country,
Prime Minister Narendra Modi is making the entire country do
yoga, he is solving the problems of the world through
yoga, if we talk about it,
the kind of violence, terrorism etc. that is spreading in India too, the
biggest thing is
yoga, isn't it, and it is not only
providing solution to India but also to the world
Madam German Press
in the Western
World Fitness Exercise N  Holistic laugh approach,
some time, not doing anything, anything done against, not against that.
If someone
wants to do yoga for health, then
do it for health. If someone wants to do it as a holistic health
exercise, then do it.
Everyone benefits from it in different ways. So,
if any country in the world practices yoga as a holistic health exercise, then do it.
Sushma ji, I am Shobhana Jain. My
question is that our embassies abroad are
sending invitations, have they been sent to the Head of States
as well?
How many Head of States have approved? Please
tell me some names. You also
saw some names in the presentation. They have been sent to the Head of
State as well. Approval for some has been given,
some has not been given to the Head of State yet,
but invitations have been sent to everyone.
Ma'am, here from PTI,
late report, Pakistan rejected the visa of
some
instructor. A comment, there is no problem,
they refused the visa. We have made internal
arrangements, but yoga will be there.
We were not relying only on this instructor for the
program. They refused the visa.
We have made the arrangement internally.
I, Santosh Thakur from Dainik Bhaskar,
want to ask you two questions. Firstly, have
you done any assessment of the business of Yoga in the entire world?
It is said that around 35% of it is
owned by the Chinese people.
So, after this Yoga Day,
how much will the Yoga Gurus of India have
control over this business or what will be India's share?
Look, firstly, I have
objection to this subject of business and trade. Yoga is
not a business for us and neither is it a business for Yoga Gurus.
Yoga is a mission for us. Yoga is a
dedication. Yoga is a surrender. And as
I said earlier, our sages have
given Yoga for the welfare of mankind. That is
why we never bring it into business and do
not bring it into business thinking that China is
earning more money or someone else is earning,
we conduct Yoga for the welfare of mankind.
And now first ask here, Madam, Pradeep
Kumar, Ma Samachar Post News English Daily,
one thing is not clear to me, the exercise
you are doing, this thing bo d  Betterment of
the Indians and the betterment of the global I don't mind who is
following your instructions who is
interested to do these things
continuously as far as making this protocol
is concerned it has been made on the basis of Indian yoga
and not on the basis of yoga from anywhere else
because Patanjali
is the guru of yoga and we have made it on the basis of this Indian heritage of yoga. I am
interested in it for the entire people, this is a
thing of public welfare and hence
we have made it for the public welfare of the entire world
Shrim
Side
my question is you know you just mentioned that
the government had made some internal
arrangements
for the Yoga Day to celebrate the Yoga Day in
Pakistan could you just be a bit more
specific and give us some details what are the
Yoga Day arrangements in Islamabad and
other places in Pakistan and will it be just
the Indian High Commission there or will it be
other agency and have you also
Requested any assistant from
Pakistani authority what is the reaction you got from them
we did
not make any kind of request to Pakistani authority because when
they did not let our visa instructor go, then
we came to know the mentality as far as
internal arrangements are concerned, we got training from
our people who knew yoga there
and
we will do yoga there in the embassy premises
Sushma ji hello which side Rajendra
Vyas Manak Rajasthani from Jodhpur ji ask me
I would like to know from you that if yoga is
said in simple language then it is to connect,
so are you also just doing the work of finding,
what investment has been made in it, whom does
your yoga connect to whom, the
soul to God, it is said in the Gita that yoga means to
connect, which connects the soul to God, that is, to
oneself, the soul to the Supreme Soul,
so how will you describe it,
when after doing yoga, meditation
starts connecting with meditation and
if you do it daily then I said in the beginning
that it connects the human being with nature, it
connects the living being with Brahma and when you are
in a meditative state then  It starts connecting
as you keep growing and the
connection keeps increasing and one day Soham's
voice comes I am the same I am the same I am the same that is
yoga Wow one
minute left now so
please Sushma ji here my name
is Rahul Mishra I am asking whether on 21st have
Congress President Sonia Gandhi and
Rahul Gandhi also been invited to it
yes they were invited but the kind of
statements they are making they might
not come please please scientific study not only study but
scientific study ma'am I
am Priyamvada from Amar Ujala right here in front of
you yes yes tell me tell me I
want to know whether there will be only PM's address at Rajpath
or he will also do yoga himself
no there will be a dignified presence of PM there will be an
address he will not do yoga himself
ma'am Pradeep ho from Dainik Bhaskar you are
saying that there will be 35000 people who will do yoga
here on Rajpath but overall what is the
total estimate you are making in the world
or how many people are you expecting that will do
yoga together  See, the actual number will
come later but as I said, yoga
gurus have set very big targets. Baba
Ramdev is saying that he will reach 10 crore people
and will get them to do the same. Shri Ravi Shankar is saying that
he will reach 5 crore people. Jaggi Vasudev is
giving his, Swami Chidanand is giving his, so how
many actually did it will be known later,
ma'am,
first of all, how many after you, how
many instructors applied for visa and was a reason given why
the visa was rejected also is
this, a tit for tat because a
Pakistani diplomat, this Mohammad Had applied
for visa and that has been rejected by
the Indian government. See, the visa that was rejected was
only one, the 30
instructors that we sent from here applied, all of them did it
and the rest were not rejected, it is
tit for tat, only Pakistan can tell,
yes
my Vikas told you I have been in New York along
with Shri Ravi Shankar who is in New York at the
UN  Programs are being held,
many programs are being held in New York as well. The program being held at the UN will be
our major
program, perhaps not in terms of numbers,
but because the United Nations did this.
So we are doing it at their UN Plaza,
yes, same time ours is 8 o'clock here, ours is 7 o'clock, the one who is
in New York is 8 o'clock
there, this is 7 o'clock here, Sushma ji,
I am Sushil Sharma speaking
from Defence Monitor Magazine,
where here, here, or so ma'am, I am
speaking from Defence Monitor Magazine,
one thing has been observed in the army that those
deployed at high altitudes,
yoga has been used very well to reduce their stress
and it has helped a lot, even the
incidents of fracture and suicide have also reduced, but will there be any such scheme for these
paramilitary forces, especially
in Jammu and Kashmir or North East, where
they are deployed in distressed areas,
so that their stress can be reduced, yes,
absolutely, I myself
called it a stress buster, it will be a
government scheme, in this way I am saying the same thing, just like it was done
there for the army, similarly
yoga should be done for the rest of the CRPF and even police personnel as well, so that
We will do this to reduce their stress Last two
questions
Okay hello I am from ETV Gujarati,
what kind of response is coming from the non-BJP states in India,
what are the preparations of the people from the states other than BJP for Yoga
International and what are the preparations in Gujarat and all the different
states, this is
not a program divided among the parties because the
state governments belong to many parties and as far as
Ayush has told that it has reached 650 districts,
those 650 districts include all the states,
so it includes all the states ruled by BJP and non-BJP,
so the preparation is very
good for the non-BJP ruled states also
Last question Ma'am this is Sushmi Dev
from Times of India I just want to know here
Ma'am but I just want to ask if this is
the first year and you are starting
is there any plan of the government to lay it
and take it forward in the coming years how are
you going to plan it or are you
planning to celebrate it in the similar
fashion it will happen every time and first  If it will be better than this then it means that
when you celebrate any one
day, International Women's
Day, don't we celebrate 8th March every year
and every year we try to make it
better than before, similarly the international
days are celebrated every year, they are
not celebrated only for one year, but
moving ahead from the experience of this time, we will
celebrate it in a better way, Suss Kulud Press
Briefing, please join us for some refreshment,
thank you.